Copyright (c) 2025 Dan Williams - All rights reserved

PROPRIETARY AND CONFIDENTIAL

Unauthorised copying of any of the source code files in
this repository, or their compiled equivalents, or their
transformed equivalents in any form, and of their various
associated documentation and supporting materials (together,
the Software), via any medium is strictly prohibited.

This Software is proprietary and closed-source. No use,
modification, or distribution is permitted in any form
without express authorisation from the copyright holder.

The Software is protected under international copyright law.
All rights reserved and protected by the copyright holders.

The Software files are confidential, and only available to
authorised individuals with the permission of the copyright
holders. If you encounter these files and do not have their
express permission, please contact the copyright holders and
delete the files.

By obtaining a commercial license you are allowed to use
this Software in the form provided by the copyright holders,
but the copyright holders retain the full copyright to the
Sofware. A commercial license does NOT provide the source
code, and it is NOT legal to attempt to acquire it, whether
by reverse engineering or otherwise.

This product does NOT come with any warranty, express or
implied.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS
OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR
OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
